# Lesson 1.1: Functions and objects

Imagine a little robot that you can train to do things.

You have the ability, with a little elbow grease, to produce infinite copies of
this little guy, and you can train it to do whatever you want.

```
             __O___O__
YOUR INPUT  |         | ROBOT'S OUTPUT
===========>   ROBOT   ===============>
            |_________|
```

In programming, this sort of robot is called a FUNCTION.

Think of a function like an "action template". When you're writing a function,
you're writing down instructions for what to do given some input which, as you
sit down to write the function, you don't yet have access to. That means that,
unless we add constraints on what types of inputs we accept (which we'll learn
how to do in [Lesson 2](./2.Types.md)), we need to make sure that our function,
which we're writing now (at what's commonly called "compile time" or "design
time") can handle whatever gets thrown at it at "run time".

All code, when it comes down to it, is functions operating on data.

Here's an example. You don't need to worry about really understanding the code
yet, but you don't need to in order to get a feel for how a function works.

```js
// This is some JavaScript code.
// These lines that start with // are COMMENTS.
/*
There are 2 ways of writing comments.
This way lets one comment span multiple lines, but using multiple // comments is fine too.
*/
function add(number1, number2) {
    return number1 + number2;
}
```

So here, we're declaring the function `add`.

In JavaScript, writing a function is called DECLARING, which is why JavaScript
functions are often called "function declarations". Declaring means that we're
defining what the function is supposed to do AND saving it in a variable called
`add` at the same time.

Without writing some more code, this function will never be INVOKED. Invoking
a function means running it[1]. 

`add` takes 2 PARAMETERS, `number1` and `number2`. These are the inputs to our
function — they are the variables that we pass into our function to tell it what
to do.

This function has one line and does basically 2 things: it adds `number1` and
`number2`, and it RETURNS the resulting value[2].

That means that we're able to write code like this. You haven't seen a VARIABLE
before — well, here it is:

```js
const five = add(2, 3);
```

The code above INVOKES the `add` function, and ASSIGNS the function's RETURN
VALUE to the VARIABLE `five` (declared with the `const` keyword[3]).

Again, from left to right:

`const` means "we're about to DECLARE a constant variable" (oxymoron, I know).

`five` is us giving this variable that we're declaring some name that we made
up. It could just as easily be `dinosaur`.

`=` is an ASSIGNMENT, which INITIALIZES (gives an initial value to) the constant.

`add` is the name of the function we wrote in the first block of code.

`(2, 3)` is the FUNCTION INVOCATION, which always takes the form of parentheses
immediately following the name of the function being invoked, into which we
"pass" the ARGUMENTS that the function needs, giving it `2` for the `number1`
parameter and `3` for the `number2` parameter.


[1] Regrettably, "call", "execute", "run", and "invoke" are all used more or
less interchangeably.

[2] The concept of a value is important. Some clauses in our code represent
SINGLE VALUES — e.g. "here's a number" or "here's a chunk of text" — and others
represent CONTROL STRUCTURES — e.g. "if this then that" or "invoke these
functions in this order". The ones that represent values are called EXPRESSIONS.
(It's not the most intuitive word. Think about how the process of cell division
causes different gene expressions: the "expressions" are properties with certain
values, e.g. having blue eyes or being 6 feet tall, as opposed to the underlying
process, which is like the control structures.)

[3] KEYWORDS are any of the special, reserved words in JavaScript that provide
some language feature. `const` is a keyword that provides us with the ability to
declare a variable (specifically a type of variable called a "constant", which
means the JavaScript engine does not allow us to assign it a different value
after).


# Lesson 1.2: Running our first function

You can run JavaScript in lots of different ways (you can even run JavaScript
code directly inside the Google Chrome Developer Tools). The easiest, though, is
to write a little HTML document and run it in your browser. It's this simple:

1. Create a folder for your code.
2. Make sure you have a text editor like Visual Studio Code installed.
3. Open your code folder in the text editor, and create a new file.
4. Paste the below HTML code into the file.

```html
<h1>My Awesome Script</h1>

<button onclick="doSomeAddition()">Do some addition!</button>

<!--
    This is some HTML code!
    These blocks that start with <!–- and end with —-> are HTML COMMENTS.
    A cool feature of HTML is that it has a tag that will execute JavaScript code!
    It's called `script`.
-->

<script>
    // This is some JavaScript code!
    // These lines that start with // are JAVASCRIPT COMMENTS.
    function add(number1, number2) {
        return number1 + number2;
    }

    function doSomeAddition() {
        window.alert("Two plus three equals: " + add(2, 3));
    }
</script>
```

5. Open the file in a browser. (Dragging and dropping should work.)

Notice what happens! We get an ALERT containing the text that we passed as the
sole ARGUMENT of the `window.alert` function.

Where the _heck_ did `window.alert` come from?

Well, there are certain perks (and consequences) of having powerful environments
inside which our JavaScript can run. The most obvious example of this is the
browser. A browser allows our JavaScript to interact with it, and the main way
it does that is by giving us access to a single variable: `window`. The value of
the `window` variable is a type of data called an object, which is JavaScript's
way of letting us store any amount of data as key-value pairs, which will often
be written like `someKey: "someValue"`. One of the kinds of data we're allowed
to store is — wait for it — functions!

We'll learn more about objects later, but for now it's important to understand
that ACCESSING A PROPERTY of an object is done with the `.` character. Say you
have an object like this:

```js
const danny = {
    firstName: "Danny",
    lastName: "Mayer"
};
```

To get my first name, we'd do this:

```js
const dannysFirstName = danny.firstName;
```

Again, don't worry about 100% understanding what's going on at this point. Just
know that 1) having objects is useful, and 2) we need some way to ACCESS their
properties, and that way is "dot notation"[1].

Now, back to the HTML we wrote in step 4 above!

In our HTML, we're ACCESSING the property `alert` on the object `window`. Since
`alert` is a function, we're then able to INVOKE it with parentheses, and pass
it the ARGUMENT it expects, which for `window.alert` is a single STRING
("string" is the JavaScript DATA TYPE that roughly means "text").

`window.alert` is an example of an "API". API is not a super well-defined term,
but roughly it means any code you're able to use in some other code. Usually we
would import an API in order to use it; in this case, we get `window.alert` for
free as part of the JavaScript environment (in this case the browser) that is
running our code. You could say that Chrome, by implementing the JavaScript
standard, is PROVIDING `window` to us as a GLOBAL VARIABLE.


[1] There's also "bracket notation", which goes something like
```js
const dannysFirstName = danny["firstName"];
```
As you can see, it's not quite as pretty, which is why it's not used that often.

